So while our art cannot, as we wish it could, save us from wars,
privation, envy, greed, old age, or death, it can revitalize us
amidst it all.

We must take arms each and every day, perhaps knowing that
the battle cannot be entirely won, but fight we must, if only a
gentle bout. The smallest effort to win means, at the end of each
day, a sort of victory.


Every morning I jump out of bed and step on a landmine. The I
landmine is me.
After the explosion, I spend the rest of the day putting the
pieces together.
Now, it's your turn. Jump!

Zest. Gusto. How rarely one
hears these words used. How rarely do we see people living, or for
that matter, creating by them.

I came across an issue where the
Bazaar photographers, with their perverted sense of equality,
once again utilized natives in a Puerto Rican backstreet as props
in front of which their starved-looking mannikins postured for
the benefit of yet more emaciated half-women in the best salons in
the country. The photographs so enraged me I ran, did not walk,
to my machine and wrote "Sun and Shadow," the story of an old
Puerto Rican who ruins the Bazaar photographer's afternoon by
sneaking into each picture and dropping his pants.

These, at one time when we
were children, were invested with magic for us. During the past
year I've published one story about a boy's last ride in a trolley
that smells of all the thunderstorms in time, full of cool—green
moss-velvet seats and blue electricity, but doomed to be replaced
by the more prosaic, more practical-smelling bus. Another story
concerned a boy who wanted to own a pair of new tennis shoes for
the power they gave him to leap rivers and houses and streets, and
even bushes, sidewalks, and dogs. The shoes were to him, the
surge of antelope and gazelle on African summer veldt


When did you last read a book of poetry or take time, of an
afternoon, for an essay or two? Have you ever read a single issue of
Geriatrics, the Official Journal of the American Geriatrics So-
ciety, a magazine devoted to "research and clinical study of the diseases and processes of the aged and aging"? Or read, or even
seen, a copy of What's New, a magazine published by the Abbott
Laboratories in North Chicago, containing articles such as
"Tubocurarene for Cesarean Section" or "Phenurone in Epi-
lepsy," but also utilizing poems by William Carlos Williams,
Archibald Macleish, stories by Clifton Fadiman and Leo Rosten;
covers and interior illustrations by John Groth, Aaron Bohrod,
William Sharp, Russell Cowles? Absurd? Perhaps.

Thomas Wolfe ate the world and vomited lava. Dickens dined
at a different table every hour of his life. Molière, tasting society,
turned to pick up his scalpel, as did Pope and Shaw.


Life is short, misery sure, mortality certain. But
on the way, in your work, why not carry those two inflated pig-
bladders labeled Zest and Gusto. With them, traveling to the
grave, I intend to slap some dummox's behind, pat a pretty girl's
coiffure, wave to a tad up a persimmon tree.
Anyone wants to join me, there's plenty of room in Coxie's Army. 

R u n fast, stand still. This, the
lesson from lizards. For all writers. Observe almost any survival
creature, you see the same. Jump, run, freeze. In the ability to
flick like an eyelash, crack like a whip, vanish like steam, here this
instant, gone the next—life teems the earth. And when that life is
not rushing to escape, it is playing statues to do the same. See the
hummingbird, there, not there. As thought arises and blinks off,
so this thing of summer vapor; the clearing of a cosmic throat, the
fall of a leaf. And where it was—a whisper.
What can we writers learn from lizards, lift from birds? In
quickness is truth. The faster you blurt, the more swiftly you
write, the more honest you are. In hesitation is thought. In delay
comes the effort for a style, instead of leaping upon truth which is
the only style worth deadfalling or tiger-trapping.


How do you commence to start to begin an almost new kind of
writing, to terrify and scare?
You stumble into it, mostly. You don't know what you're doing,
and suddenly, it's done. You don't set out to reform a certain kind
of writing. It evolves out of your own life and night scares.
Suddenly you look around and see that you have done something
almost fresh.


In the words of the old Mikado song, I had a little list, save it
was a long one, which led me into Dandelion Wine country and
helped me move the Dandelion Wine country up to Mars, and
ricocheted me back into dark wine territory as Mr. Dark's night
train arrived long before dawn. But the first and most important
pileup of nouns was the one filled with leaves whispering along
the sidewalks at 3:00 A.M. and funerals wheeling by on empty
railtracks, following, and crickets that suddenly, for no reason,
shut up, so you could hear your own heart, and wish you couldn't.


Similarly, in a lifetime, we stuff ourselves with sounds, sights,
smells, tastes, and textures of people, animals, landscapes, events,
large and small. We stuff ourselves with these impressions and
experiences and our reaction to them. Into our subconscious go
not only factual data but reactive data, our movement toward or
away from the sensed events.
These are the stuffs, the foods, on which The Muse grows.
This is the storehouse, the file, to which we must return every
waking hour to check reality against memory, and in sleep to
check memory against memory, which means ghost against
ghost, in order to exorcise them, if necessary.



Well, we might start our list like this:
Read poetry every day of your life. Poetry is good because it
flexes muscles you don't use often enough. Poetry expands the
senses and keeps them in prime condition. It keeps you aware of
your nose, your eye, your ear, your tongue, your hand. And,
above all, poetry is compacted metaphor or simile. Such meta-
phors, like Japanese paper flowers, may expand outward into
gigantic shapes.

The Muse must have shape. You will write a thousand words a
day for ten or twenty years in order to try to give it shape, to learn
enough about grammar and story construction so that these
become part of the Subconscious, without restraining or distort-
ing the Muse


